FEW 2006 Abstract Katie SteeleWhat is it rational to value?There are many responses to the Allais Paradox, some reconciling it withexpected utility (EU) theory, others holding that the two cannot bereconciled (for better or worse for the theory). In this paper, I willfocus on a particular aspect of the debate-the extent to which Savage'ssure-thing principle constrains the content of (not just therelationship between) our preferences. Many accept that an agent'sattitudes towards risk and feelings of regret can legitimately beconsidered part of an act's outcomes. This claim is nonethelesscontentious, because risk and regret do not reside in any particularoutcome, but rather arise from the way in which potential act outcomesare related to one another, i.e. they are "global properties" of theoutcome space or decision problem. Indeed some hold that incorporatingglobal properties in individual outcomes is outright inconsistent withSavage's (in particular) EU theory. I think this claim is too strong. Iargue that the issue rests, rather, on whether we are interested in adescriptive, predictive or normative decision theory. While there may begood descriptive or predictive reasons for assigning value to globalproperties of the outcome space, I argue that this move severely weakensEU theory as a guide to rational choice. Of course, when we considerexamples beyond Allais, in particular some telling choice problems posedby Machina (1982 & 1991), then it seems incorrect to exclude risk andregret sentiments from a model intended to guide choice. I examine thedifferent ways we might respond to this, some defending and otherschallenging EU theory's dominance as the theory of rational choice.Abstract references:Machina, M. 1982. "Expected Utility" Analysis without the IndependenceAxiom. Econometrica 50.Machina, Mark J. 1991. Dynamic Consistency and Non-expected Utility. InFoundations of Decision Theory, edited by M. Bacharach and S. Hurley.Oxford and Cambridge, MA: Basil Blackwell.